
IMAGEGRID

This project will re-imagine a feature from an old jQuery widget, which is no longer needed.

DESCRIPTION

	IMAGEGRID is a programable machine that places images or other content into the cells of a pre-existing CSS grid. 
	
	Each cell of the target grid is processed one at a time in a controlled process that animates swaping content into and out of the cells. 

	The process can loop indefinitely, suspend, restart and regulate the rate of interaction.

	IMAGEGRID can target any CSS grid layout and manage multiple grids simultaneously. In most circumstances, however, there will be only one active grid in the viewport at a time. 

	IMAGEGRID is conceived as an addon, meaning it is not a structural part of the web site, and should not be tightly integrated into code in the main branch. Instead, it adds animation to existing elements. If IMAGEGRID fails, the site will be uneffected.


	PREDEFINED COMPONENTS:

		1. CSS grid as the target
		3. VAULT array containing meta data for all media on the site (from JSON)
		4. MEDIA that satifies the subject and requirements of the grid 


	REQUIREMENTS and RESTRAINTS:

		Determine the number of grid cells in the target grid.
		Assign a static cell number to each grid cell.
		Change the content of cells one at a time until all cells in the grid have been processed.
		Programatically choose which grid cell to process next.
		Insure that no media content is ever visible in the target grid more than once. 
		When all cells have been processed, repeat and loop indefinitely.
		Make the time interval between changing one cell and the next live and programable.
		Monitor the size and aspect ratio of the window; recalculate if it changes.
		React when the target grid is or is not visible in the viewport.
		Insure that no grid cells are ever empty unless specified.
	
	
	TERMS AND CONCEPTS:
	
		1. OPTIONS. The style and timing settings for the current grid:
				
				RATE - Time interval between replacing one cell and the next: 
					FLASH - 50ms
					FAST - 1000ms 
					MEDIUM - 3000ms
					SLOW - 5000ms
			
				MODE - Pre-defined operation modes:
					RANDOM - Process cells with a random time interval between 100ms and the RATE set above (except FLASH)
					FLASH - Change all cells in the grid as fast as possible until every cell has been changed, then revert to settings above
					CONSTANT - Constant RATE set above
					OTHER - TBD
			
				STATE - What IMAGEGRID is doing:
					ACTIVE - currently running
					IDLE - currently waiting
					ERROR - not available
					LOADING - not available yet
					OTHER - TBD

		2. SPOTTER. A semi-autonomouse subroutine that decides which grid cell to replace next and which cells remain to be processed according to predefined methods:

				RANDOM - Each cell is chosen randomly (default)
				ORDERED - Cells are chosen in a pre-defined order (future)

		3. EFFECT. The type of animation used when swaping the contents of a cell:

				FLIP - Outgoing content and incoming content flip on their Y axis simultaneously (default)
				SHUFFLE - The incoming content appears to drop on top of the outgoing content like a playing card, hiding it from view (future)
				DISSOLVE - One fades into another (future)
				CUT - No animation (future)
				ROTATE - 2D rotate (future)
				OTHER...
				
				In each of these effects, the outgoing content disappears (removed from the grid) and the new content takes its place.

		SPOTTER and EFFECT employ prebuilt plugins that can be switched in or out of IMAGEGRID programatically and anticipate new plugins written in the future. 

		When building IMAGEGID, prepare for the possibility that these effects may be combined, or to put it another way, stacked. For example, RANDOM + ROTATE.


-------------------
HOW IT WORKS

	The content placed into grid cells will be described as a card, or protoCard, whether it is a single image or a collection of related elements.

	There are five arrays:

		1. VAULT[] 

			This array contains meta data for all media on the site. The data is loaded into VAULT from a JSON file. The VAULT array is organised by a media code number (key), and all data related to the code number (value) such as client, venu, type, path or other values related to the media. 
			
			The VAULT array is static and never changes. The JSON file is created in CMS, not IMAGEGRID. 

			A sample from vault.json:

				{ "PAS001-02-04-003" : 
					{
						"CAPTION" : "From a series of images celebrating the people who work at Pasadena Power.",
						"CLASS" : "Photo",            // "CLASS" is a database term, not CSS
						"CLIENT" : "Pasadena Power",
						"FILENAME" : "PowerPeopleJohn.jpg",
						"LINK" : "PAS001-02-03-002",  // reference to a related media item
						"PATH" : "media/images/samples/PowerPeopleJohn.jpg",
						"ARIA" : "A smiling Pasadena Power worker with a lampshade on his head",
						...
					} 
				}

			IMAGEGRID first finds all the VAULT records that satisfy the requirements for the target grid. Example:

					imageGrid.load (targetgrid, gridsubject, action, option)

					targetgrid = 	the CSS grid that IMAGEGRID will intertact with
					gridsubject = 	a key:value pair from VAULT used to select related VAULT items, like class:photo 
					action = 		perform the action(s) specified
					option = 		option or flag(s) to alter the default behavior (or other needs)

					// imageGrid.load (galllery-photo, photo, activate, flash)

			IMAGEGRID creates an instance of a new protoCard for each record chosen from VAULT and populates it with appropriate data like the media code number and a kill flag.
			
			These card instances are COPIED to the DRAWSTACK array. This is a DEEP COPY.
	

		2. DRAWSTACK[]

			This array is a queue for cards that will be placed into the cells of the target grid. The RATE determines how fast the next card in the queue is processed.

			IMAGEGRID chooses a card record from the DRAWSTACK array and prepares to MOVE it to the PLAYSTACK array where it will placed into a cell in the target grid.   

			Before each protoCard is processed, a series of tests validate the transfer. For example, if the card has been flagged for removal, the protoCard record is deleted from the DRAWSTACK array instead of being moved to PLAYSTACK.

			MOVE means removed from the DRAWSTACK array and added to the PLAYSTACK array.
		
			
		3. PLAYSTACK[]

			The cards (records) in this array are placed into cells of the target grid and become visible in the viewport. The incoming cards from the DRAWSTACK array are assigned to a cell in the target grid by the SPOTTER subroutine. 
			
			When the grid cell content swap occurs, a pre-configured EFFECT module provides animation for the replacement. For example Flip, Slide, Shuffle, etc.

			IMAGEGRID monitors the target grid to ensure these rules: 
			
					1. Process the target grid cells one at a time until every cell in the grid has been replaced.
					2. No cell is processed twice. 
					3. No card is processed twice. 
					4. NO card is displayed in the target grid more than once.


		4. DISCARDSTACK[]

			When IMAGEGRID replaces the content of a cell, the outgoing card is removed from the PLAYSTACK array and added to the DISCARDSTACK array; the media content it represents is no longer visible in the viewport. 

			The card records in the DRAWSTACK array remain there until summoned.

			At some point, the DRAWSTACK array will be empty. When this happens, all the cards in the DISCARDSTACK array are MOVED back to the gueue in DRAWSTACK array. The process repeats indefinitly, or until there are new instructions. 

			
		5. GRIDCELLS[]
			This array does not contain any data related to the items being processsed by IMAGEGID. It is a token generator that SPOTTER uses to choose grid cells while never picking the same cell twice. 
			
			The GRIDCELLS array contains as many records as there are cells in the target grid. Each record in GRIDCELLS contains only a normal array index number and one field that contains a cell number from the target grid. 

			In practice, GRIDCELLS might look like this:

					const gridcells = [1,2,3,4,5,6...n]   n = number of cells in target grid
			
			If the current mode specifies a "random" configuration, SPOTTER chooses a random INDEX number from GRIDCELLS and uses the number value in that array record as the next grid cell to process. 

			PAY ATTENTION: The number chosen comes from the cell number field in the array record, not the INDEX number. 

			After a GIDCELLS index number is chosen, and the grid cell number is recovered, the chosen GRIDCELLS index number is deleted.  
			
					Example: If there are 10 cells in the target grid, there should initially be 10 records in GRIDCELLS (index 0-9), one record for each cell. If SPOTTER randomly picks gridcells[4], whatever value is in the gridcell number field is processed by IMAGEGRID. 
					
					gridcells[4] is deleted and gridcells.length drops to 9. 

			Here, IMAGEGRID takes advantage of the charachteristics of an array object. When a record is deleted from an array, the index numbers are re-generated. In this case GRIDCELLS will now contain 9 records with index numbers from 0 to 8. 

			For the next cell, SPOTTER again chooses a random index number from GRIDCELLS.
			
			Since gridcells[4] was just deleted, the grid cell number it contained is no longer available. Thus, IMAGEGRID processes all the cells in the target grid randomly without the chance of repeating any one cell.

			SPOTTER loops through the GRIDCELLS array until all of the records are deleted (and all of the cells in the target grid are processed), at which time GRIDCELLS is repopulated:
			
					length of GRIDCELLS = number of target grid cells 
					
			The process loops indefinitely or until IMAGEGRID sends new instructions.

			Adjust as necessary for 0-based array.


---------------------
TLDR:
	
	IMAGEGRID selects a group of media data records from the VAULT array and creates a protoCard for each chosen item. 
	
	For each protoCard, IMAGEGRID creates a record in the DRAWSTACK array. 

	IMAGEGRID moves cards in a one way loop from array to array continuously until IMAGEGRID issues new instructions or they are flaged for removal.

	Cards i the PLAYSTACK arayy become visible in the viewport.

			DRAWSTACK --> PLAYSTACK --> DISCARDSTACK --> DRAWSTACK


---------------------
DETAILS:
	
	Media meta data selected from VAULT is attached to a new prototCard before it is added to DRAWSTACK. 
	
	IMAGEGRID assigns an ID to each protoCard for tracking and control:
	 
			Each new instance of protoCard is given a card-ID of "PREFIX" + "NNN".

			"PREFIX" = a value related to the subject of the content in the target grid (like "PHOTO"). The prefix in the name can be used to select a subgroup of related cards among all the cards IMAGEGRID is processing.

			"NNN" = a sequence number reflecting the order cards are created + 100. On creation, every card is assigned a z-index that is equal to this number. Assigning the card a z-index higher than the z-index of the card it will replace insures that it will appear in the viewport on top of the outgoing card.
			
			Consider best practice to handle z-index conflicts.

			// "PHOTO-136"
	
	protoCards can be added to the PLAYSTACK array in any order IMAGEGRID determines but uses SPOTTER() to place protoCards into target grid cells. 
	
	PAY ATTENTION: SPOTTER places protoCards into cells according to cell number, not according to card number (in the card name). 

	When an incoming card replaces the outgoing card, the old card (array record) is deleted from the PLAYSTACK array and added to the DISCARDSTACK array.  

	Immediately after the outgoing card is removed from the grid (removed from the PLAYSTACK array), the incoming card is assigned the z-depth of the grid cell it occupies, which is the cell number in the target grid. Thus, it will have a lower z-index than any new card replacing it in the future. 
	
	After each card is "spotted" on the grid, a test determines if gridcells.length = 0. If so, a new set of GRIDCELLS records is generated. 
	
	REMOVING CARDS

	To remove a card from a set of cards IMAGEGID is processing, it is flagged for removal, not deleted directly. A card can be flagged for removal any time, at any stage of the loop: DRAWSTACK, PLAYSTACK or DISCARDSTACK. IMAGEGRID checks to see if a card has been flagged for removal on the next cycle when a card is about to be moved from DRAWSTACK to PLAYSTACK. If a card has been flagged for removal, it is not moved to the next stack but is deleted instead.

	OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

	Although any card or any combination of cards can live in the DRAWSTACK at the same time, they are normally grouped or related to each other in some definable way, like PHOTOS.

	If IMAGEGRID is assigned to more than one target grid at a time, it must generate a unique name or some other methodology to link IMAGEGRID to individual target grids. For example: "imagegrid-photo." However, an alternative method is described below in AUTO SUSPEND.

	Each protoCard should automatically assume whatever size object is loaded into it or if dimensions are hard coded, care must be taken to insure protoCard size, grid cell size and content size are compatible. Since everything is responsive these days, there may not be any issues, but this is worth noting.
	

-----------------
ARCHITECTURE

In the orignal jQuery widget, each protoCard fell through a series of switch statements until it came to a case that had not yet been completed, at which point the step was executed, followed by a break.

The protoCard then fell to the bottom of the switch statement where it was returned to the top of the same switch statement. When the card again dropped to the case just executed, it would skip that function and fall to the next case that had not been executed. 

These notes do not include any reference to CSS other than the CSS target grids. While CSS  interaction is necessary, lets adopt a KISS strategy ("Keep It Simple Stupid"). In the interest of simplicity, CSS and Javascript should be divided wisely and logically to avoid complex configurations and buried values. 

Javascript variables that update CSS vars are prefered where, and if, practical. (Javascript is the source of truth)

All of these notes are speculative. More efficient or more current methods should be recommended. 



-------------------	
PHASE I - INITIAL DEVELOPMENT
Build a simple, fundamentaly sound example for one CSS Grid in the generalidea.com repo.

	.class client-logo-gallery
	
Create GitHub branch "imagegrid" for this project.

The first version will use a random RATE, a random SPOTTER configuration and a FLIP EFFECT. To restate the definitions:

	RANDOM RATE - cards are placed into grid cells at a random time interval 
	RANDOM SPOTTER - cards are placed into randomly chosen grid cells 



----------------------
PHASE II - ADDITIONAL FEATURES 
Once a basic working implementation of IMAGEGRID is stable, additional controls are necessary.

	QUORUM

	DRAWSTACK can contain as many cards as practical as long as there are more cards than there are cells in the target grid. To avoid timing issues and to obscure repetitions, a quorum is created. The quorum is the least number of cards IMAGEGRID needs to function properly with the target grid. Something like: 

		var card-buffer = 3;				// default
		
		const grid-name = 	target-grid-name,
				cell-count = 	target-grid-cell-count,		
				card-count = 	cards-in-drawstack-count,
				quorum = 		true;		// if (card-count > (cell-count + card-buffer));
		
		if (!quorum) {
				console-error (`IMAGEGRID - There aren't enough cards for the ${grid-name} grid`);
				...
				IMAGEGRID fails silently
				...
			}

	Be aware that the number of cells in a target grid may change if, for example, the user changes the size or aspect of the viewport or the device is rotated from portrait to landscape. This may not matter if cells are only hidden and the cards remain in the IMAGEGRID queue.

	This is the case in .class client-logo-gallery in the current repo.

	DEAD ZONE BUG

	In rare circumstaces, a card can land on a grid cell that IMAGEGRID just processed. To trap this anomoly, SPOTTER should store the last grid cell-number processed named something like last-cell. When selecting a new cell, SPOTTER should look at last-cell to see if last-cell-number == new-cell-number. If true, SPOTTER should skip that cell and choose a new target cell. Note that in this scenario, last-cell has been removed from GRIDCELLS and will not be available again until GRIDCELLS is replenished. 

	AUTO SUSPEND

	When a target grid is scrolled off the page, or no longer visible in the viewport, IMAGEGRID should suspend processing that grid until it appears in the viewport again. This implies that every target grid in the site could have an instance of IMAGEGRID assigned to it, which means IMAGEGRID would have to differentiate all the different grids it processes. 

	A second strategy would be to simply clear the records in IMAGEGRID (not the target grid) when the user leaves the page and re-initialize IMAGEGRID when the user lands on a different page with a different grid. Simpler? There aren't many cards to replace in any grid, probably < 50.

	SUSPEND STRATEGY

	Other than the target grid leaving the viewport. if IMAGEGRID has to terminate its control of a grid, or replace cells with new content, provisions for how to dispose of the cards already in the loop is necessary. Delete all, delete some, add some, etc. 

	In any event, IMAGEGRID must never leave a target grid empty, or any of its cells empty, unless specifically writen to do so.
	
	THROTTLE

	Since it's possible to scroll past grids in the viewport programatically or manually, or display a grid briefly, a buit-in delay should be incorporated between the moment a grid becomes visibe in the viewport and when IMAGEGRID begins or restarts. A delay of 4 or 5 seconds. For initial development, IMAGEGRID will replace grid cell content randomly, at a random rate, so the delay will not be noticed.


----------------------
PHASE III - ADVANCED FEATURES and ENHANCEMENTS 
When work on IMAGEGRID for the first example target grid is complete, it will be expanded for other grid types and animation senarios. 

	COMPLEX CONTENT

	Other CSS grids in this repo will require more complex architecture and must respond to user interaction, like click handlers and touch options. Additional plugins will also be needed for specific scenarios.

	NEW MODULES

	Modules should be writen like plugins. They are added or sustituted as needed by simple comands. EFFECT modules must be self-contained to the extent that different modules writen with different methodologies can work with IMAGEGRID "out of the box."

	(The term "module" here is used conceptually, not to indicate Javascript modules per se.)

	EFFECT MODULES

	Different animation effect modules can be switched in and out of IMAGEGRID for different situations. The initial EFFECT module will be FLIP. Other situations will require different animations. 
	
	The method of animating the card swap may be enhanced with GSAP. Although GSAP is already installed, a simple CSS 3D flip animation may be sufficient until IMAGEGRID is stable -- unless it would be simpler to use GSAP from the begining. 

	MODE MODULES

	Initially, the only mode writen will be RANDOM. Additional operating modes like ORDERED, PATTERNED and others may be needed. 

	STACKED MODULES

	Be prepared for modules that may be combined. RANDOM + ROTATE would choose cells randomly and rotated each card slightly for a less mechanical effect.

	TARGET CELL and TARGET CARD
	
	There should be provisions to add one card to a specific grid cell and what to do with the content already in that cell.

			1. Just add the new card(s)
			2. Replace some cards with the newly added card(s) 
			3. Remove a specific card or cards 


---------------------
MISCELLANEOUS

	PROTOCARD THOUGHTS

	As originally written, media was attached to a pre-built element in the prototype. Similarly, other features or proxie elements, like a button or text, were added to the prototype. These elements were not always used. 
	
	The protoCard may include
		
		Initial development:
		~	An imageWell element where a media file is attached
		~  VAULT Code number 
		~  Kil flag

		Future:
		~  Empty text element
		~	A button
		~	A drop shadow on the imageWell object 
		~	Link address; the VAULT code number of a related media item
		~	A function call to trigger an event
		

----------------------
POSSIBLE STRUCTURE (INCOMPLETE and REQUIRES REVIEW)

// SITE
		var 	vault = 			[];
				
// IMAGEGRID ELEMENTS						// for current grid 
		const drawstack = 	[],
				playstack = 	[],
				discardstack = [],
				gridcells = 	[];			// gridcells.length = grid-cell-count
	
	IMAGEGRID SETTINGS								
		const targetgrid =	"",
				mode = 			"random"		// default 
				rate = 			4000,			// max time between effects
				throttle = 		4000,			// activation delay after grid is visible
				effect = 		"fip",		// default animation effect
				effect-rate =	250,			// default animation duration
				card-buffer = 	3;				// defualt value for all grids
	
	IMAGEGRID VALUES
		const	active = 		false,   	// true if processing any grid
				last-card =		0,				// assigned
				card-count = 	0,				// assigned 
				card-quorum = 	false;		// true if card-count > (grid-cell-count + card-buffer)

	IMAGEGRID PLUGINS
		const	


// GRID
		data	data-grid-name = 			"",
				data-grid-content = 		"",		// type of media from VAULT for this grid 
				data-grid-active =		true,		// process this grid
				data-grid-visible =  	false,  	// target grid is visible in viewport
				data-card-rotation = 	0;   		// future
				data-grid-cell-count = 	0,			// ** certain grids may be variable **
				data-grid-card-buffer =	6;			// special case for this grid || default

//	CARDS
		data 	data-card-code = 		"",			// Code number from VAULT
				data-card-name = 		"",			// Name from VAULT; human readble; only for log (not the filename)
				data-card-prefix = 	"",
				data-card-number = 	0,
				data-card-remove = 	false;		

//	JAVASCRIPT
		code	build instance of protoCard before adding it to DRAWSTACK
		code	before moving a card from DRAWSTACK to PLAYSTACK, test for:
					kill flag 		// remove card?
					last card 		// new card == last card, skip 
					grid full		// no target grid cell can be empty  
					qourum			// inagegrid-card-count > target-grid-cells


----------------------
NOTES 

	1. It may be helpful to create a reference table to hold variables specific to each grid. 			

	

	